When getting started with the debug console,
it's interesting to see that you can access data about the entire blockchain.
In this video, we'll cover three commands you can use
to explore the blockchain using the Bitcoin Core Debug Console.
The commands will cover are getblockchaininfo, getblockcount and verifychain.
The goal is for you to be comfortable exploring these commands
and understanding the basics of what information they provide.
This will be important later as you begin using these commands to build
your own blockchain applications that need access to this type of data.
Feel free to follow along as we work through each of these commands. Let's get started.
First, getblockchaininfo returns various state information about blockchain processing.
This is a great first step to get an overview of the entire bitcoin blockchain.
Using the help function,
I can see it returns information,
like the chain, blocks,
headers, and many other details.
Now that I know what to expect,
over on get blockchain info in my console.
Here you'll see the values for each of the fields that we saw before.
We can see that we're on the test chain.
There are this number of blocks,
this number of headers, and so on.
When looking in your console,
you'll probably see different values than I do.
That's because the blockchain will continue to change over time,
so things like the number of blocks will continue to grow.
This command also shows you a few interesting things like the BIPS,
hard forks or soft forks that have happened on the chain.
Here's an example that comes up, BIP66,
for this BIP, we can see the version and whether or not it was accepted to the network.
In this case, it says the reject status equals true,
which means that this was never implemented into the protocol.
Scrolling a little lower,
we can see BIP9 which includes two main updates, CSV and segwit.
You can learn even more information about the forks
shown here on the Bitcoin BIP GitHub page.
We've linked that below the video.
If you're interested, check out what CSV was meant to
improve to better understand the effect it had on the blockchain.
Next, we'll go over getblockcount.
This command returns the number of blocks
you've synced to your local copy of the blockchain.
This is helpful in situations where you'd like to know
how far along you are towards syncing to the network.
Using the help function,
I can expect what this command will return.
Here it shows that it'll simply return a number.
I can run this command by typing getblockcount into the console.
Here, the console shows me that there are this number of blocks in my current blockchain.
This is actually something you saw already in
getblockchaininfo the difference here is that this specifically
returns the number of blocks where get
blockchaininfo returned this data along with tons of other information.
Finally, the command verifychain,
allows you to verify the blockchain database.
Using the help function,
you can see that this will return true or false
depending on if the blocks you specify or verified.
Running this command can take a bit of time as the debug console
runs through the entire history of blocks to check and verify them.
As you can see, when I run this,
it returns true meaning that everything on the entire chain is accurate.
When you do this, it doesn't look like much,
but it's actually pretty amazing what it's doing.
It's running through the entire history of transactions on
the blockchain and checking to make sure that every block is valid.
This is what we mean when we keep saying that everyone in the peer
to peer network has the power to verify information,
and with this command,
you get to do it for yourself.
That wraps up a quick overview of commands you can use to inspect the blockchain.
The commands we covered were getblockchaininfo, getblockcount and verifychain.
The commands allow you to explore this type of functionality,
but also empower you to provide this type of
data to users of your own blockchain application.
Feel free to experiment with each of
these commands to help you get a better understanding of the blockchain